Add sars anvil tutorial (#4250)
galaxyproject/training-material: topics/sequence-analysis/tutorials/sars-with-galaxy-on-anvil/tutorial.md

Learning Objectives
- Learn the history the sequencing revolution
- Introduce the sequencing workforce
- Explore the evolution of sequencing technology

<a href="http://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=player_embedded&v=tXLTHqNT6Jg" target="https://youtu.be/tXLTHqNT6Jg"><img src="http://img.youtube.com/vi/tXLTHqNT6Jg/0.jpg" alt="Video thumbnail image for the Sequencing Revolution background video." width="240" height="180" border="10" /></a>

## Alignments

This lecture module introduces the structure of genomic data and how alignments work. It touches on the “shredded book” analogy, demonstrates how short chunks of data can be compared to find variation, and reviews data files needed for alignments, including reference genomes and read data. It also reviews some diverse applications of variant detection made possible via alignment tools.

Learning Objectives
- Learn about data as “reads” & shredded books
- Become familiar with reference genomes and alignments
- Explore the file structure of genomic data and quality scoring

> <a href="http://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=player_embedded&v=MEZP_AzlLyg" target="https://youtu.be/MEZP_AzlLyg"><img src="http://img.youtube.com/vi/MEZP_AzlLyg/0.jpg" alt="Video thumbnail image for the Alignments background video." width="240" height="180" border="10" /></a>

Author: Totally agree! I'd love to do that in the near future.

![Screenshot of the Galaxy landing page. The Tools and History headings have been highlighted.](../../images/sars-with-galaxy-in-anvil/10-galaxy-on-anvil.png)

On the welcome page, there are links to tutorials. You may try these out on your own. If you want to try a new analysis this is a good place to start.

# Exercise One: Importing Data into Galaxy

Luckily, we linked to the original data when we cloned our Workspace! We have three files we will need for our activity. These are (1) the reference genome for SARS-CoV-2, and both forward (2) and reverse (3) reads for our sample. There are two sets of reads for our sample because the scientists who collected it used paired-end sequencing. The reference genome ends in “.fasta” because it has already been cleaned up by scientists. The sample we are looking at ends in ".fastq" because it is raw data from the sequencer.

> <hands-on-title>Import Data from the Workspace</hands-on-title>
>

> > 1. Click on Upload Data in the Tools pane.

Reviewer: Is tutorial mode not enabled in anvil environments? Ah well

> 2. Click on “Choose remote files” at the bottom of the popup. Double-click the top selection, which is the Workspace folder, then “Tables/” then “reference/”. Click the reference .fasta file so that it is highlighted in green and click “Ok”.

> > ![Screenshot of the Galaxy Data upload page with the current AnVIL workspace highlighted.](../../images/sars-with-galaxy-in-anvil/11-galaxy-data-workspace.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>    ![Screenshot of the Galaxy Data upload page with the current AnVIL workspace highlighted.](../../images/sars-with-galaxy-in-anvil/11-galaxy-data-workspace.png)
```

> 3. Is it okay to proceed based on the per base sequence quality?
>
> > <solution-title></solution-title>
> >
> > 1. 43,522 reads. Zero flagged as poor quality. Sequence length is 3-301 base pairs.
> > 2. 28-40 is pretty good. 
> > 3. Yes, because the per base sequence quality is good (“in the green”).
> >
> {: .solution}
{: .question}

> <details-title>Learn more about quality scores</details-title>
>
> You may be wondering how the fourth line of the .fastq files relates to the quality score above. To save space, the sequencer records an [ASCII character](http://drive5.com/usearch/manual/quality_score.html) to represent scores 0-42. For example 10 corresponds to “+” and 40 corresponds to “I”. FastQC knows how to translate this. This is often called “Phred” scoring.
> What does 0-42 represent? These numbers, when plugged into a formula, tell us the probability of an error for that base. This is the formula, where Q is our quality score (0-42) and P is the probability of an error:
>
>Q = -10 log10(P)
>
>Using this formula, we can calculate that a quality score of 40 means only 0.00010 probability of an error!
>

> > Learn more from the [Quality Control Tutorial FAQs](https://training.galaxyproject.org/training-material/topics/sequence-analysis/tutorials/quality-control/faqs/).

Reviewer: This should have triggered an alert but somehow it avoided it. Need to investigate that at some later date.

>
{: .details}

# Exercise Three: Alignment

Given that our data has passed some quality checks, we will try to align the data to the reference genome. In this case it is simple, a viral genome. A human sequencing project will generate much larger data sets. There are many aligners, but we will start off looking at a simple aligner BWA-MEM. This example uses paired data.

We will use our two SARS data files, which are ready for alignment.

> - VA_sample_forward_reads.fastq
> - VA_sample_reverse_reads.fastq

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `VA_sample_forward_reads.fastq`
- `VA_sample_reverse_reads.fastq`
```

> 2. Run the tool.
>
{: .hands_on}

The output file is a `BAM` file, which lists where each read aligns to the reference genome and whether there are any differences. You can click the eye button to preview the results, but the results are not easy to interpret visually (much like the `fastq` files). Instead you will use a genome viewer in the next step.

> <question-title></question-title>
>
> 1. What is alignment software (for example, BWA-MEM) actually doing?
> 2. Here we are using paired fastq (“paired end”) data. What is an advantage of using paired data?
>
> > <solution-title></solution-title>
> >
> > 1. Alignment tools figure out the optimal positioning of the reads next to the reference genome to minimize mismatches and gaps. 
> > 2. Paired data is made up of fragments that are read twice (forward and reverse). Paired data improves data accuracy.
> >
> {: .solution}
{: .question}

# Viewing aligned data

We have aligned our data but it is currently a table of where the reads align. This is hard to read, so we will use [JBrowse](https://jbrowse.org/jbrowse1.html) to view the data.

> <hands-on-title>Visualize Reference Data</hands-on-title>
>

> > 1. Scroll down in the Tools menu to STATISTICS AND VISUALIZATION. Under "Graph/Display Data", select {% tool [JBrowse](https://toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/view/iuc/jbrowse/a6e57ff585c0) %}.

Reviewer: This also should have failed linting, I really don't understand :| 

This isn't the right format for a tool link, it should look like 
```suggestion
> 1. Scroll down in the Tools menu to STATISTICS AND VISUALIZATION. Under "Graph/Display Data", select {% tool [JBrowse](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/iuc/jbrowse/jbrowse/1.16.9+galaxy0) %}.
```

>    - {% icon param-select %} *"Reference genome to display"*: `Use a genome from history` 
>    - {% icon param-select %} *"Select the reference genome"*: `SARS-CoV-2_reference_genome.fasta`
> 2. Click "Run Tool".
> 3. You should see a new JBrowse item appear in your history. Click the eye icon {% icon galaxy-eye %} to open JBrowse. 
>
{: .hands_on}

You will need to click on the magnifying glasses to zoom in, but you should see the A,C,G, and Ts and their corresponding colors that make up the SARS-CoV-2 genome!

![Screenshot of preliminary JBrowse results. The eye icon is highlighted, as it should be used to open the JBrowse viewer. The magnifying glasses in JBrowse are also highlighted as they enable zooming in to see the individual bases.](../../images/sars-with-galaxy-in-anvil/15-galaxy-jbrowse-ref.png)

This is interesting, but it doesn’t let us compare the genome to the sample we have. We suspect there may be some differences that indicate our sample is the delta variant. 

> <hands-on-title>Visualize Aligned Data</hands-on-title>
>

> > 1. Scroll down in the Tools menu to STATISTICS AND VISUALIZATION. Under "Graph/Display Data", select {% tool [JBrowse](https://toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/view/iuc/jbrowse/a6e57ff585c0) %}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> 1. Scroll down in the Tools menu to STATISTICS AND VISUALIZATION. Under "Graph/Display Data", select {% tool [JBrowse](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/iuc/jbrowse/jbrowse/1.16.9+galaxy0) %}.
```

---
layout: tutorial_hands_on

title: SARS-CoV-2 Viral Sample Alignment and Variant Visualization
level: Introductory
zenodo_link: ''
questions:
- How do I check my data quality?
- How do I put together my dataset of fragmented sequences into a full sequence? 
- How do I visually explore the variants in my SARS-CoV-2 sample?
objectives:
- Gather and evaluate experimental evidence, including qualitative and quantitative data
- Generate and interpret graphs displaying experimental results
- Critique large data sets and use bioinformatics to assess genetics data
- Tap into the interdisciplinary nature of science
time_estimation: "1H"
key_points:
- Use Galaxy on the AnVIL cloud computing resource to check data, perform an alignment, and visualize the results.
contributions:
    authorship:
    - nakucher
    - avahoffman
    - robertmeller
    editing:
    - katherinecox
    - cutsort
    - nakucher
    infrastructure:
    - cansavvy
    - avahoffman
    - katherinecox
    - ehumph

>     - cutsort

Reviewer: if you have funding source you'd like to call out, you're welcome to annotate that here as well!

Author: added, thanks!

lang: "en"
---

There is a growing need for undergraduate students to learn cutting-edge concepts in genomics data science, including performing analysis on the cloud instead of a personal computer. 

This lesson aims to introduce a mutant detection bioinformatics pipeline based on a publicly available genetic sample of SARS-CoV-2. Students will be introduced to the sequencing revolution, variants, genetic alignments, and essentials of cloud computing prior to the lab activity. During the lesson, students will work hands-on with the point-and-click Galaxy interface on the AnVIL cloud computing resource to check data, perform an alignment, and visualize their results.

> <agenda-title></agenda-title>
> 

> > In this tutorial we will deal with:

Author: updated, thanks!

> 3. Clone the workspace by clicking the teardrop button and selecting “Clone”.
> ![Screenshot showing the teardrop button. The button has been clicked revealing the "clone" option. The Clone option and the teardrop button are highlighted.](../images/sars-with-galaxy-in-anvil/02-clone-button.png)
>   - In the new window, give your Workspace clone a name by adding an underscore (“_”) and your name.
>   - Next, select the Billing project provided by your instructor. 
>   - Leave the Description and Authorization Domain boxes as-is.
> ![Screenshot showing the "clone a workspace" popout. The Workspace name, Billing Project, and Clone Workspace button have been filled in and highlighted.](/topics/sequence-analysis/images/sars-with-galaxy-in-anvil/03-clone-settings.png)
>   - Click “CLONE WORKSPACE”.
> 
{: .hands_on}

## Starting Galaxy

Galaxy is a great tool for performing bioinformatics analysis without having to update software or worry too much about coding. In order to use Galaxy, we need to create a cloud environment. This is like quickly renting a few computers from Google as the engine to power our Galaxy analysis. 

> <warning-title>Internet Browser</warning-title>

> > Currently, you will need to use Chrome or Safari as your browser for Galaxy cloud environments to work.

Author: Google Chrome is the browser where AnVIL is most supported. Safari and Firefox are still usable (afaik), but there might be some functionality that does not work as expected. I updated this text to reflect that instead!

{: .warning}

> <hands-on-title>Clone the Workspace </hands-on-title>
>
> 1. In your new Workspace, click on the “ANALYSES” tab. Next, click on “START”. You should see a popup window on the right side of the screen. 
> ![Screenshot of the Workspace Notebooks tab. The notebook tab name and the plus button that starts a cloud environment for Galaxy have been highlighted.](/topics/sequence-analysis/images/sars-with-galaxy-in-anvil/05-start-galaxy.png)
> 2. Click on the Galaxy logo to proceed.
>    - Click on “NEXT” and “CREATE” to keep all settings as-is.
>    - ![The NEXT button among cloud environments has been highlighted.](/topics/sequence-analysis/images/sars-with-galaxy-in-anvil/06-galaxy-next.png)

> >    - ![The CREATE button among cloud environments has been highlighted.](/topics/sequence-analysis/images/sars-with-galaxy-in-anvil/07-galaxy-create.png)

Author: thank you! @avahoffman is amazing at these!

Click on the eye icon {% icon galaxy-eye %} in the new file in the history “FASTQC on data2 Webpage”. 

You will open up a summary report for the sequencing file:

![Screenshot of the FastQC results. The Basic Statistics and Per Base Sequence Quality sections for the report on VA_sample_forward_reads.fastq are visible.](/topics/sequence-analysis/images/sars-with-galaxy-in-anvil/13-fastqc-report.png)

> <question-title></question-title>
>
> 1. Explore “Basic Statistics”. How many total reads are there? Have any been flagged as poor quality? What is the sequence length?
> 2. Explore “Per base sequence quality”. Based on the Basic Statistics, is 28-40 a good or bad quality score? 
> 3. Is it okay to proceed based on the per base sequence quality?
>
> > <solution-title></solution-title>
> >
> > 1. 43,522 reads. Zero flagged as poor quality. Sequence length is 3-301 base pairs.
> > 2. 28-40 is pretty good. 
> > 3. Yes, because the per base sequence quality is good (“in the green”).
> >
> {: .solution}
{: .question}

> <details-title>Learn more about quality scores</details-title>
>

> > You may be wondering how the fourth line of the .fastq files relates to the quality score above. To save space, the sequencer records an [ASCII character](http://drive5.com/usearch/manual/quality_score.html) to represent scores 0-42. For example 10 corresponds to “+” and 40 corresponds to “I”. FastQC knows how to translate this. This is often called “Phred” scoring.

Author: linked to https://training.galaxyproject.org/training-material/topics/sequence-analysis/tutorials/quality-control/faqs/.

> > You may be wondering how the fourth line of the .fastq files relates to the quality score above. To save space, the sequencer records an [ASCII character](http://drive5.com/usearch/manual/quality_score.html) to represent scores 0-42. For example 10 corresponds to “+” and 40 corresponds to “I”. FastQC knows how to translate this. This is often called “Phred” scoring.

Reviewer: Ah not quite what I meant, I'll make some commits on top of this PR.

>    - *"Single or Paired-end reads"*: `Paired`
>    - *"Select first set of reads"*: `VA_sample_forward_reads.fastq`
>    - *"Select second set of reads"*: `VA_sample_reverse_reads.fastq`
> 2. Run the tool.
>
{: .hands_on}

The output file is a `BAM` file, which lists where each read aligns to the reference genome and whether there are any differences. You can click the eye button to preview the results, but the results are not easy to interpret visually (much like the `fastq` files). Instead you will use a genome viewer in the next step.

> <question-title></question-title>
>
> 1. What is alignment software (for example, BWA-MEM) actually doing?
> 2. Here we are using paired fastq (“paired end”) data. What is an advantage of using paired data?
>
> > <solution-title></solution-title>
> >
> > 1. Alignment tools figure out the optimal positioning of the reads next to the reference genome to minimize mismatches and gaps. 
> > 2. Paired data is made up of fragments that are read twice (forward and reverse). Paired data improves data accuracy.
> >
> {: .solution}
{: .question}

# Viewing aligned data

> We have aligned our data but it is currently a table of where the reads align. This is hard to read, so we will use [JBrowse](https://jbrowse.org/jb2/) to view the data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have aligned our data but it is currently a table of where the reads align. This is hard to read, so we will use [JBrowse](https://jbrowse.org/jbrowse1.html) to view the data.
```

jb2 is still work in progress, not in galaxy yet.

Reviewer: very cool to see y'all using it though! Really great to see

> <hands-on-title>Shut Down Galaxy in AnVIL</hands-on-title>
> 1. Return to AnVIL, and find the Galaxy logo that shows your cloud environment is running. Click on the Galaxy logo.
>   ![Screenshot of the Workspace menu. The currently running Galaxy cloud environment logo on the right of the page is highlighted.](/topics/sequence-analysis/images/sars-with-galaxy-in-anvil/19-galaxy-env.png)
> 2. Click "Settings".
>   ![Screenshot of the Environment details menu. The Settings button is highlighted.](/topics/sequence-analysis/images/sars-with-galaxy-in-anvil/20-galaxy-edit.png)
> 3. Next, scroll down and click on “DELETE ENVIRONMENT”:
>   ![Screenshot of the cloud environment pop out menu. The “DELETE ENVIRONMENT” button is highlighted.](/topics/sequence-analysis/images/sars-with-galaxy-in-anvil/21-galaxy-delete.png)
> 4. Finally, select “Delete everything, including persistent disk”. Make sure you are done with the activity and then click “DELETE”.

>     ![Screenshot of the cloud environment pop out menu. The “Delete everything, including persistent disk” radio button has been checked and is highlighted. The “DELETE” button is highlighted.](/topics/sequence-analysis/images/sars-with-galaxy-in-anvil/22-galaxy-delete-pd.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>    ![Screenshot of the cloud environment pop out menu. The “Delete everything, including persistent disk” radio button has been checked and is highlighted. The “DELETE” button is highlighted.](/topics/sequence-analysis/images/sars-with-galaxy-in-anvil/22-galaxy-delete-pd.png)
```
